docs: Add rule conditions documentation (#951)
honeycombio/refinery: rules_conditions.md

# Refinery Conditions

## Overview

Refinery rules are described as a series of conditions.
Each condition is composed from a combination of these named parameters:

- `Field` (or `Fields`)
- `Operator`
- `Value`
- `Datatype`

The `Operator` is a required parameter, and controls which of the condition's other elements are required and which are optional.

## `Field`

The `Field` parameter points to a specific named element in the trace data.
If a `Field` is named within a span, then it `exists`.
A specific `Field` may or may not exist on any specific span in a trace.
It might not even exist within a trace at all.

When a `Field` is absent in all spans within a trace, the associated rule does not apply to that trace.

A `Field` is always a single string.
A `Field` is always matched by exact comparison.
No transformations for case or punctuation are performed.

### Example use of `Field`

```yaml
Conditions:

>     Field: http.route

Reviewer: as a note, we're likely going to need to update this with the new otel semantic conventions name next year :(

Author: Yup.

    Operator: =
    Value: /health-check
```
### Leveraging Special Refinery Telemetry in Root Spans

Some Refinery configuration options introduce special fields that are added to telemetry.

> For example, when `AddCountsToRoot` is enabled, `meta.span_count` is added to all root spans, and allows for the creation of rule conditions based on span counts.
> 
> ```yaml
> Conditions:
>     Field: "meta.span_count"
>     Operator: ">"
>     Value: 300
>     Datatype: int
> ```
> 
> In this `meta.span_count` example, the Refinery rule applies to traces with more than 300 spans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, when `AddCountsToRoot` is enabled, `meta.span_count` is added to all root spans, and allows for the creation of rule conditions based on span counts.
In this `meta.span_count` example, the Refinery rule applies to traces with more than 300 spans.

```yaml
Conditions:
    Field: "meta.span_count"
    Operator: ">"
    Value: 300
    Datatype: int
```

```

Reviewer 2: ^ Careful. I don't think the suggestion really takes the end of the yaml codeblock into account here? My apologies about that.

This example shows a rule that drops traces containing more than 1000 spans by using the virtual field `?.NUM_DESCENDANTS`.

```yaml
Rules:
    - Name: Drop any big traces
      Drop: true
      Conditions:
        Field: "?.NUM_DESCENDANTS"
        Operator: ">"
        Value: 1000
        Datatype: int

```

#### Supported Virtual Fields

All virtual fields are prefixed with `?.` to distinguish them from normal fields.
Currently only one virtual field is supported.

- `?.NUM_DESCENDANTS`: the current number of child elements contained within a trace.

## `Fields`

The `Fields` parameter allows a single rule to apply to the first match among multiple field names.
It is typically used when telemetry field names are being changed.
It is exactly equivalent to `Field`, except that it must be expressed as an array of strings instead of a single value.
The array defines a sequences of `Field` names that are checked in order for each span being considered.
The first field that `exists` on any given span is used for the condition.

> ### Example use of `Fields`

Reviewer: Can I use `Fields` if I only have one?

If so, should we simply promote the use of `Fields` for all cases?

Author: Because of YAML and Go, you have to express Fields as an array, while Field can only be a single value. That means that all existing refinery rules would have to change. I would have preferred to have just one way to do it, but I couldn't do that and keep backwards compatibility.

Reviewer: Ah shucks

# Refinery Conditions

## Overview

Refinery rules are described as a series of conditions.
Each condition is composed from a combination of these named parameters:

- `Field` (or `Fields`)
- `Operator`
- `Value`
- `Datatype`

> The `Operator` is never optional, and controls which of the parameters are required and which are optional.

Reviewer 2: 1. If the `Operator` is never optional, doesn't that mean it's required?

```suggestion
The `Operator` is a required parameter, and controls which of the condition's other parameters are required and which are optional.
```

Reviewer 2: For the second half of the sentence, maybe replace "other parameters" with "other elements"?

## `Field`

The `Field` parameter points to a specific named element in the trace data.
If a `Field` is named within a span, then it `exists`.
A specific `Field` may or may not exist on any specific span in a trace.
It might not even exist within a trace at all.

When a `Field` is absent in all spans within a trace, the associated rule does not apply to that trace.

> A `Field` is always a single string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `Field` is always a single string.
```

A `Field` is always matched by exact comparison.
No transformations for case or punctuation are performed.

### Example use of `Field`

```yaml
Conditions:
    Field: http.route
    Operator: =
    Value: /health-check
```
### Leveraging Special Refinery Telemetry in Root Spans

> Some Refinery configuration options introduce special names that are added to telemetry.

Reviewer 2: Is it a name or an additional field?
```suggestion
Some Refinery configuration options introduce special names that are added to telemetry.
```

> For example, when `AddCountsToRoot` is enabled, `meta.span_count` is added to all root spans, allowing for the creation of rule conditions based on span counts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, when `AddCountsToRoot` is enabled, `meta.span_count` is added to all root spans, and allows for the creation of rule conditions based on span counts.
```

```yaml
Conditions:
    Field: "meta.span_count"
    Operator: ">"
    Value: 300
    Datatype: int
```

> In this scenario, the rule applies to traces with more than 300 spans.

Reviewer 2: I'd move this to line 41, so users understand the context of the yaml example that they're about to view.
```suggestion
In this `meta.span_count` example, the Refinery rule applies to traces with more than 300 spans.
```

> For details about all supported special fields, check out [documentation here](https://docs.honeycomb.io/manage-data-volume/refinery/configuration/#refinery-telemetry)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For details about all supported special fields, check out our [Refinery Telemetry documentation](https://docs.honeycomb.io/manage-data-volume/refinery/configuration/#refinery-telemetry).
```

### Virtual Fields

To handle specific scenarios when rules are evaluated before the arrival of root spans, Refinery introduces the concept of virtual fields. These fields provide metadata about traces that have timed out while waiting for their root span.

```yaml
Rules:
    - Name: Drop any big traces
      Drop: true
      Conditions:
        Field: "?.NUM_DESCENDANTS"
        Operator: ">"
        Value: 1000
        Datatype: int

```

> This example shows a rule that drops traces containing more than 1000 spans, using the virtual field `?.NUM_DESCENDANTS`.

Reviewer 2: Please move this line above the yaml example.
```suggestion
This example shows a rule that drops traces containing more than 1000 spans by using the virtual field `?.NUM_DESCENDANTS`.
```

#### Supported Virtual Fields

> All virtual fields will be prefixed with `?.` to distinguish them from normal fields.

Reviewer 2: We're not living in the future. We're talking about what Virtual Fields does right now.

```suggestion
All virtual fields are prefixed with `?.` to distinguish them from normal fields.
```

Currently only one virtual field is supported.

- `?.NUM_DESCENDANTS`: the current number of child elements contained within a trace.

## `Fields`

> The `Fields` parameter is exactly equivalent to `Field`, except that it must be expressed as an array of strings.

Reviewer 2: When would you use `Fields` vs `Field`? When you have more than one field name to evaluate?

Author: Yes -- please check my rewrite.

Reviewer 2: 👍

The array defines a sequences of `Field` names that are checked in order for each span being considered.
The first field that `exists` on any given span is used for the condition.

### Example use of `Fields`

This example shows how one might write a rule designed to cope with an expected name change of a key field.

```yaml
Conditions:
    Fields:
        - http.status
        - http.request.status
    Operator: =
    Value: 200
    Datatype: int
```

## `Operator`

The `Operator` parameter controls how rules are evaluated.
Because YAML treats certain characters like less-than (`<`) specially, it is good practice to always enclose the basic comparison operators in single quotes (like `'<'`).

The `Operator` may be one of the following:

### `'='`

Basic comparison -- `equals`.
True if the value of the named Field is equal to the `Value` specified.
See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

### `'!='`

Basic comparison -- `not equals`.
True if the value of the named Field is not equal to the `Value` specified.
See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

### `'<'`

Basic comparison -- `less than`.

> True if the value of the named Field is less than the `Value` specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns `true` if the value of the named Field is less than the `Value` specified.
```

> See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [`Datatype`](#datatype) for how different datatypes are handled.
```

### `'<='`

Basic comparison -- `less than or equal to`.

> True if the value of the named Field is less than or equal to the `Value` specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns `true` if the value of the named Field is less than or equal to the `Value` specified.
```

> See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [`Datatype`](#datatype) for how different datatypes are handled.
```

### `'>'`

Basic comparison -- `greater than`.

> True if the value of the named Field is greater than the `Value` specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Returns `true` if the value of the named Field is greater than the `Value` specified.
```

Author: I changed "Returns true" to "The result is true" because "returns" isn't really meaningful here. OK?

Reviewer 2: That works! Thanks, Kent!

See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

### `'>='`

Basic comparison -- `greater than or equal to`.

> True if the value of the named Field is greater than or equal to the `Value` specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Turns `true` if the value of the named `Field` is greater than or equal to the `Value` specified.
```

> See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [`Datatype`](#datatype) for how different datatypes are handled.
```

> ### starts-with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `starts-with`
```

Tests if the span value named by the `Field` begins with the text specified in the `Value` parameter.
Comparisons are case-sensitive and exact.

Values are always coerced to strings -- the `Datatype` parameter is ignored.

### contains

Tests if the span value named by the `Field` contains the text specified in the `Value` parameter.
Comparisons are case-sensitive and exact.

Values are always coerced to strings -- the `Datatype` parameter is ignored.

### does-not-contain

Tests if the span value named by the `Field` does not contain the text specified in the `Value` parameter.
Comparisons are case-sensitive and exact.

Values are always coerced to strings -- the `Datatype` parameter is ignored.

> ### exists

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `exists`
```

Tests if the specified span contains the field named by the `Field` parameter, without considering its value.

Both the `Value` and the `Datatype` parameters are ignored.

> ### not-exists

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `not-exists`
```

Tests if the specified span does not contain the field named by the `Field` parameter, without considering its value.

Both the `Value` and the `Datatype` parameters are ignored.

> ### matches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `matches`
```

Tests if the span value specified by the `Field` parameter matches the regular expression specified by the `Value` parameter.
The regular expression grammar used is the syntax used by the Go programming language.
It is documented [here](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp/syntax).

> For clarity, regular expressions in YAML should usually be quoted with single

Reviewer 2: The formatting for these two paragraphs are different than the rest of the document. Were these sourced from somewhere else?

Author: I wrote them first when I was still writing the code. Forgot to fix them. Thanks for the poke.

Reviewer 2: No worries, Kent. Thank you!

backslash (`\`). This implies that backslashes intended for the regular
expression will have to be doubled. The same expression as above using double
quotes looks like this: `"\\d+"`.

Example:
```yaml
      RulesBasedSampler:
            Rules:
                - Name: Drop traces for any path element starting with /health or /status
                  Conditions:
                    - Field: http.target
                      Operator: matches
                      Value: '/(health/status)\w+'
 ```

Values are always coerced to strings -- the `Datatype` parameter is ignored.

## `Value`

The `Value` parameter can be any value of a supported type.
Its meaning and interpretation depends on the `Operator` in use.

See [`Datatype`](#datatype) ffor how different datatypes are handled.

## `Datatype`

The `Datatype` parameter controls the type of the values used when evaluating rules for the basic comparison operators.
When `Datatype` is present, before evaluating the `Operator`, both the span value and the `Value` parameter are coerced (converted if necessary) to the specified format, and the comparison takes place as appropriate for that datatype.

There are 4 possibilities:

> - `string` -- the comparison uses string operations (for example, "2" is considered to be greater than "10" because '2' > '1')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `string` -- The comparison uses string operations. (For example, "2" is considered to be greater than "10" because '2' > '1'.)
```

> - `int` -- the comparison uses integers (1.5 == 1 because 1.5 gets converted to 1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `int` -- The comparison uses integers. (1.5 == 1 because '1.5' gets converted to '1'.)
```

> - `float` -- the comparison uses floating point, which generally reflects how most people think of numbers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `float` -- The comparison uses floating point, which reflects numbers with fixed digits.
```

> - `bool` -- the comparison tries to convert values to boolean. Note that because of the semantics of YAML, the `Value` parameter will interpret not only `true/false` but also all of `yes/no`, `y/n`, and `on/off` as boolean values. Span values, for historical reasons, interpret `true/false` and `1/0` as boolean, and all other values are considered to be `false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `bool` -- The comparison tries to convert values to boolean. Note that because of the semantics of YAML, the `Value` parameter will interpret not only `true/false` but also all of `yes/no`, `y/n`, and `on/off` as boolean values. Span values, for historical reasons, interpret `true/false` and `1/0` as boolean, and all other values are considered to be `false`.
```
